

The philosophy of Integral Humanism and the concept of Antyodaya have been the guiding principles of the party. This commitment can be seen in the emergence of the idea of ‘Sab ka Saath, Sab ka Vikas’ and the pro-poor, pro-farmer and pro-rural sector policies of the government.

Deendayal Ji in his economic policy always emphasized on the welfare of the poorest of the poor. The last man in the society was at the centre of his economic ideas. He said, ‘The success of economic planning and economic progress will not be measured through those who are at the top of the society’s ladder, but through the people at the lowest rung of the society.’ Antyodaya means the welfare of the people in the bottom of the pyramid. He said, ‘It is our thinking and principle that these uneducated and poor people are our gods. We have to worship them. It is our social and human dharma.’

Inspired by his concept of Antyodaya, BJP under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, along with coalition governments in different states, is continuously moving on the path of Antyodaya. All its policies are focused on the development of villages, and welfare of the poor, the farmers, the deprived and oppressed sections of the society with special efforts on empowerment of the youth and women.

By providing social security to the poorest of the poor, the average living standard is being raised. Schemes like MUDRA, Jan Dhan, Ujjwala (free gas connection to poor), Swachh Bharat Abhiyan which includes toilet construction, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana, affordable houses, cheap medicines and medical treatment etc. are being initiated. Farmers are receiving neem coated urea at affordable rates with no leakages into black market. Agriculture is being upgraded with schemes like ‘Soil Health Card’ to help the farmer decide what to produce. Irrigation is being improved with micro irrigation, better and low cost water management with the aim of doubling  the income of the farmers. Heavy investments are being made in the villages through various schemes. The inspired vision of Deendayal Ji, remains committed to dedicating the country’s resources for the welfare of the needy by checking corruption, black money and the loot of public funds. The path to ‘Ek Bharat, Shrestha Bharat’ is being laid out for alleviating poverty in the country.
